>> Kyle Simpson: Welcome to
version three of this workshop.
I'm excited about the updates
that we're going to have
in Functional-Light JavaScript.
We're going to be talking over
the course of the next two days
about functional programming,
what that means,
how to restructure our brains, because
it is a very different way of thinking.
We have to restructure our
brains to think about and
try to solve problems in a different way.
And if you have never done
functional programming before,
don't worry,
we're going to go from the very basics.
If you've done functional programming
before, you should be aware that this is
not exactly functional programming
with the little trademark next to it.
It's my brand of functional programming
that I call Functional-Light,
that's where this name comes from.
So, this is the name of this course,
it's also the name of the companion book
of the same name,
Functional-Light JavaScript.
So, if you are looking for somewhere to go
from here, somewhere to dig into more of
the concepts, or to get more of
the background on something.
If we go too quickly through something and
you need to go back and review,
I strongly recommend
digging through that book.
Fair warning, even though it says light
in the title, both in this course and
in the book, it is not an intro beginner,
light and easy sort of a course.
What we mean by light, it's not deep.
And actually we are going to go
pretty deep into these topics.
But rather, what I mean by light is
that we're not trying to inundate you
with terminology, mathematic notation,
which is what I would call the top-down
approach to teaching
functional programming.
And I don't know what your experience
may have been, trying to be exposed
to materials, books, blogs, talks,
courses on functional programming.
But I've been doing this
programming thing for a long time,
I'm now probably 25ish
years into programming.
And almost all of that has been in
JavaScript, or at least aware of and
familiar with JavaScript.
And I have gone to countless talks,
read countless blog posts, tried to
pick up and read the first chapter
of I don't even know how many books on
the topic of functional programming.
And it always seems to me like the first
couple of paragraphs are like, yeah,
I'm tracking with this, I get this.
And then all of a sudden,
they throw a word in like a monad or
something like that.
They'll throw a word in like that.
And I'm immediately,
because those words don't mean anything in
the English language,
I'm immediately out of context.
Some of you may have that same experience,
where you feel like, wait a minute,
I was tracking and then all of a sudden
we just went completely off the rails.
Not a little bit at a time, but
just entirely off the rails.
Or maybe it's not a term, but maybe
it's some sort of mathematic equation,
or they talk about something like category
theory or something like that, and
immediately, I'm off the rails,
I'm losing track of what's happening.
So by the first 10 or 15 minutes of
every functional talk I've ever been to,
my eyes have glazed over, and
I'm just barely keeping up, if even that.
So maybe that's your story, and
it certainly has been my story.
It's felt to me like
running face first into
the side of a cliff wall of a mountain,
where I kept wanting to,
I was motivated, and
motivation wasn't the problem.
I kept wanting to understand what
this functional thing was all about.
I remember, actually, probably more than
20 years ago, I remember hearing someone.
And that would have been early
on in my programming career,
so I certainly wouldn't have had
any sense of what the gravitas,
what the meaning of this would have been.
But I remember hearing somebody saying
something like blah, blah, blah,
functional programming.
And I remember thinking to myself, I'm
good with that because I use functions.
And it turns out that I
didn't know anything at all
about what I was doing there.
That it turns out that the idea of having
a keyword in your program called function,
that's not enough.
So I decided to write this book,
and I decided to build this course.
Because for me, all of the existing
materials, while completely valid and
totally right,
I have absolutely no critique of them.
Other than,
for whatever reason, they didn't work with
the way that my brain approached things.
They didn't align with my background.
And I felt inferior about that,
by the way, because I do have a CS degree.
I have a background in computer science,
and I took a lot of math courses.
And so, it's particularly pronounced
that I feel inferior when
somebody says well, it's just math.
And I'm like, well, I'm pretty good
at math and I still don't get it.
And the reason this course is
called Functional-Light JavaScript,
the reason the book is called
that is because I wanted to take,
rather than the top-down approach,
a bottom-up approach.
Speaking of the mountain, the cliff
face that I kept running into and
feeling inferior.
Feeling like I just somehow wasn't
good enough, that I was dumb or
that something was wrong with me.
I kept having people say to me, well, it's
great and it's amazing and it's awesome.
And I'm like,
the problem is not my motivation.
I know smart people that know functional
programming, and I totally agree with them
that it would be great for
me to know functional programming.
The problem is the path.
And actually the problem
is not even the path,
the problem is even more
fundamental than that.
It's like if you walked up to, I don't
know if any of you are rock climbers,
earlier in my life, let's say,
I did some rock climbing.
I am definitely not a rock
climber at this point, okay?
But I liked the idea of rock climbing,
I would love to just be one of those
people that could zip up the wall.
I watched this documentary the other day,
and
this guy's like doing this speed racing
up the rock climbing or whatever.
I'd love to do that, but
that's not me, okay?
I'm not a rock climber, but
I can imagine the moment walking up to
the cliff wall or
a rock climbing wall in your favorite gym.
And somebody who is very experienced
in it, who's already up on the wall,
up near the top, yelling down at you,
just go ahead and
grab that equipment and
you can climb right on up.
And they point to this pile of
equipment sitting on the ground.
And that's what it's felt like to
me with functional programming,
is that we start talking about
things that make sense to me.
And then all of a sudden they say, and by
the way, the carabiner, or and by the way,
this such and such not on the rope, or
they start using things as if
I already know what they are.
They start using those terms as if
I already know what they are, or
they use a process to
describe those things,
that they're assuming that process
is already familiar to me.
And that's where I get lost,
and it would be the same thing if somebody
tried as an experienced rope climber,
to explain to me the very basics of
what on earth is this metal loop for?
That I happen to know
is called a carabiner.
What is that for?
What does it do?
How does it work?
What are its properties and
characteristics?
Because what I can imagine is for
the most experienced of the rock climbers
out there, they are so far beyond
the idea of what is a carabiner?
That they have forgotten what it
was like when they didn't know what
a carabiner was.
And I don't know if any of you
have ever had this experience with
something else that you have learned.
You're all excellent professionals at what
you do and you probably have at some time
or another, tried to explain to somebody
else something that you're pretty good at.
I get to do that for a living and
it's a particular joy.
Because it forces me to come back
to understand on a regular basis,
just how easy it is to lose track,
to lose empathy for
someone who doesn't understand
what you're saying.
I do it all the time.
I use words, and then somebody looks
at me weird, and I'm like, yeah,
you don't know what that word means.
Let me explain what that concept means,
right?
So it's a joy for
me to continue to come back to that.
To be confronted with and come back
to those roots and ask those things.
It's been said that if you can't
explain something to someone else,
then you don't really understand it, but
that doesn't fully encapsulate the truth.
Because at some point,
you can understand something so
well that you may stop being able
to explain it to someone else.
Doug Crockford said it this way years ago,
he said, the curse of the monad, and
I'm gonna extrapolate that from monad,
which is a crazy concept.
Which by the way,
by the end of this course,
we are gonna understand what a monad is.
But, he's said the curse of the monad,
which I'll extrapolate to functional
programming in general,
the curse of functional programming
is that once you understand it,
you stop being able to teach it.
And I've experienced that
personally on many occasions,
seeing people who write
these fantastic things.
And I know they know what
they're talking about.
It's not a question of, like, credential.
It's not a question,
like they're an idiot.
They're smart people, and
they know what they're talking about.
But the way that they presented
is from the top-down,
with the assumption that you already have
all of that training and background.
And so they can use something
like the word carabiner, and
you know what that means.
I didn't know what a carabiner meant, and
I didn't know what
a rope knot looked like.
And so
I kept not benefiting from that material.
So this book and
this course are my attempt to
give you a ground-up perspective.
Again, it's not a beginner intro.
This is deep, heady, difficult stuff.
And it's stuff that I still wrestle with,
I am still challenging with.
So I'm not here to tell you,
I'm a functional programmer, okay?
I have not arrived at
the top of the mountain and
now I have all the clarity and
I can see everything.
This is still a daily struggle that I
am trying to understand these concepts,
and use them more effectively in my code.
And I decided to write it down, so
that hopefully other people might benefit
from my exploration,
my journey of learning.
That's what this course is about.